The coronavirus has devastated
the airline industry.
U.S. air travel has dropped 95 %
compared to last year, and the
number of flights scheduled globally
is down by 63 %.
The insides of airports are empty,
but outside is another story.
While some airlines have started
transporting cargo on passenger
planes, more than two-thirds of
the world's commercial aircraft are
grounded. It's somewhere between 14
and 15,000 aircraft that are
parked, or almost 60
% of the fleet.
Never before in history have airlines had
to ground so many planes so
quickly. Customers have come to us
and said, look, we're parking
literally hundreds of
aircraft per day.
And logistically, it's
very, very complex.
This is a particular difficult time
and we've created a particular
app that literally allows them to
virtually park the aircraft with no
demand for flights. Delta and
United reported their first quarterly
losses in more than five years.
American Airlines told CNBC its revenue is
down 90 % from a year ago.
Parking hundreds of aircraft is
also adding to their losses.
These planes can't just sit idle.
They need routine maintenance and
a place to be stored.
And when you suddenly have thousands of
planes with nowhere to go, it
becomes a logistical nightmare.
Before the coronavirus hit, airplanes were
where they were meant to be
in the air. At certain times of the
year, there could be as many as
20,000 planes in flight at the
same time around the world.
At the end of 2019, the global
air fleet was nearly 24,000 and now
more than 16,000 of those massive
machines need a place to park.
And that number can continue to go
up as airlines cut their networks.
Aircraft storage facilities have been around
for decades, but never in
history has the aviation industry had to
park so many planes at once.
Airlines are having to get creative
about finding space for planes.
A recent flyover of a
storage facility in Victorville, California,
shows planes fit together like
puzzle pieces on unused runways.
Victorville is well known as one
of the world's biggest airplane
boneyards, a storage location for out
of service or old planes.
It was already storing Southwest's fleet
of Boeing 737 max eight, but
it's now storing hundreds of other aircraft
due to the lack of demand
and air travel. Victorville, along
with boneyards in Roswell, New
Mexico, and Tucson, Arizona, are
currently the top three locations
for parked aircraft. They've collectively
stored 800 so far.
Routine parking happens from
time to time.
Very, very small
volumes of aircraft.
But this is completely unprecedented,
so widespread that aircraft are
being parked at airports, all over
major airports now have many
parked aircraft on the ground and they're
gonna be there for a while?
As you can see here, American
Airlines is using Tulsa International
Airport as a parking lot
for many of its jets.
There's currently over 50
grounded airplanes here.
Nothing this big has ever
landed in the Alice.
More than a dozen planes are now
sitting in a storage facility at the
Outback Airport.
Aircraft range in size.
For scale, a standard football
field is 160 ft.
wide. A narrow body jet like Boeing
737 has a wingspan of 117 ft.
But wide body airliners
can be twice that.
The world's largest plane, Airbus's A380,
has a wingspan of 261 ft.
Even aircraft manufacturer Airbus is
being asked to help out.
Customers have come to us and
said, look, we're talking literally
hundreds of aircraft per day and we
have a huge amount of maintenance
work to do with that. And
we've created that particular app.
And that's an app that helps our
customers to work out exactly how
much maintenance is needed and
even logistically where the aircraft
are. And that enables them to very
quickly optimize how to block the
aircraft, which park them and also to
prepare them when they come out
of service when this is through.
Airbus, along with Boeing, dominate
the commercial aircraft industry
and together make up 91%
of the market share.
Airbus has over 11,000
planes in operation.
Skywise is a digital platform
the manufacturer offers its customers
to keep up the
health of an aircraft.
It collects data from systems
and sensors to help predict
maintenance, as well as help
with logistics of daily operations.
Airbus has added a new feature
to help airlines find parking.
Parking an airplane isn't as easy
as just finding a spot.
Factors like how long the plane will
be out of service and what type
of maintenance needs to be done, play
a role in finding a location.
A decision is made as to
whether it's basically storage or whether
it's actual parking.
Now, parking is typically
relatively short term.
It's a bit like putting something
in the fridge compared to longer
term storage, which would be where
you put it in the freezer.
So certain pieces of maintenance must be
done before you can pick up
an aircraft, even if it's just
for a couple of days.
These aircraft cost hundreds of
millions of dollars and maintaining
them is not cheap. Even when parked,
they need to run the engines,
cycle fluids and move the tires,
among many other checklist items.
This is why some airlines are flying
with just a few passengers aboard
just to keep them running.
When airlines know the plane is going
to sit for months at a time,
they're sent to the desert because
the dry climate helps prevent
corrosion. If it sits on the ground
for one or two months and has
been operated that whole time, it
requires a lot more maintenance to
bring it back in the service than,
let's say, if it has been started
up every 10 days or so.
I was just speaking with the
head of maintenance for significant U.S.
airline. And what this person told me
is that right now they have
need for X number of aircraft,
but they're actually keeping 2X.
In other words, twice as many active
and they're rotating them in and
out. So that way for those other
aircraft, they won't have to worry
about the more extensive maintenance
bringing them back in the
service. At the moment, w e have about
80% of the fleet in the park
ing mode. Eithad Airways, for example,
returned over 100 planes to
its main base in Abu Dhabi, where
it sealed up engines and sensors to
prevent things like sand from
getting into critical areas.
They're a very intricate,
complex piece of machinery.
It's not a lot parking a car.
The outlook for coronavirus
is still unclear.
Boeing told its shareholders that air
travel could take two to three
years to return to normal.
Airlines have had to consolidate fleets
to cut back on costs.
International travel has been hurt the
most and with good reason.
And it's very difficult now
to travel between countries.
This means that long haul aircraft,
which are generally what we call
twin aisles, or wide bodies are
going to suffer more than single
aisles like the 737 and 320.
The A380, the big double decker
that Airbus launched a little bit
over a decade ago, every one
of those is on the ground.
A hundred percent of the
A380s are grounded today.
The larger it is and the older
it is, the more it suffers.
So when you're down gauge, you're
going to go to the smaller
aircraft, the most
economical aircraft.
Airlines before co ronavirus
were doing great.
They had the highest employment levels
in the United States, at least
in 17 years.
They were hiring like crazy,
Pilots, flight attendants, expecting
this big rush in
travel to continue.
And we've seen it over the
last decade, the decade of profitability.
And now they're going to be
posting the first losses in years.
Airlines have seen
incredible losses.
And analysts don't expect that
to stop anytime soon.
Like many businesses, large and small,
they're in survival mode and
looking for ways to conserve cash.
Lack of demand could lead to
canceling or deferring future orders
from manufacturers.
Airbus and Boeing have already
cut back on production.
And both companies are
planning to slash jobs.
As for the thousands of aircraft
parked around the world, retirement
could come much
earlier than expected.
The thing to understand is that
before this crisis hit, airlines
couldn't get these planes fast enough
with one of their biggest
complaints was that
aircraft were delayed.
So the market for
aircraft was very high.
Airbus and Boeing, which dominate
aircraft production, have been sold
out of some of their best sellers
through pretty much the middle of
the decade. So it was even
hard to get a slot.
And we're going to see
that kind of reverse.
And you'll see some cancellations.
You'll see deferrals. We'll see that
market sort of loosen up.
But some airlines, because fuel is such
a big cost, they do want the
more fuel efficient
aircraft going forward.
But the timing of when they get
those planes, that's going to change.
It will all depend on
when demand comes back.
6,000 of these are
15 years or older.
4000 of these are 20 years or more.
And so they're already
approaching retirement age.
And we're in a situation now
where we have thousands of excess
aircraft. So if you're an airline
and you're deciding what aircraft
you're going to keep around, you
don't want to spend millions of
dollars on maintenance to keep your
older aircraft around for them to
fly into next year.
So the impact here is dramatic.
There is no timeline for when the
world will return back to normal.
So for now, much of these aircraft
will sit waiting for the return to
normalcy like the rest of us.